- [Tutor] Now let's shift gears
and focus on working with data structures in Java.
So that means we need to start unpacking
the collections framework.
The framework can be broken down into three sections,
interfaces,
algorithms,
and implementations.
The interfaces are the foundation of the platform
because they are the main abstract types
that determine what methods are available on collections,
like the list, set, and map.
Without implementations,
we can't do much with just an interface.
So the framework also provides several classes
that implement the core interfaces
and provide the underlying source code
for the data structures.
We also find algorithms in the framework
that support working with collections.
These are provided through static methods
that give us functionality for working with collections
like sorting and searching.
These interconnected sections of the framework
work together to provide developers with most of the code
they'll need to work with data structures in Java.
Now let's talk a little history.
Java 1.2 was when the collections framework
was first introduced.
Prior to that,
there were a few classes like hash table and vector
that supported working with objects,
but they had some concerns about performance and quality.
These classes were re-engineered
to satisfy collection interfaces and to support generics.
But for most situations,
you'll want to use the types introduced
with the collections framework.
The Java community still debates if legacy collection
should be deprecated.
So if you're adding them into new source code,
you should have a good reason why.
Developers use the collections framework
so frequently in Java
that many of its benefits are overlooked.
The framework contains all of the code a developer needs
for working with data structures.
So we're not required to build
our own data structure implementations,
or to design their interfaces.
It's provided by the language.
Since every Java developer uses the same code
for data structures,
it's a standard.
So you can pick up someone else's code
without needing to understand
a bunch of custom data structures that they created.
The collections framework also was built
by some of the brightest engineers
and has decades of use in production systems.
So you can trust that you're using
a high quality data structure
that isn't riddled with bugs or performance problems.
Because the same collections APIs
are used by developers across the language,
it naturally creates interoperability
across different code bases.
If you look at other Java technologies,
like, Java EE, Spring, or the Apache projects,
you'll find collection scattered across their code.
This promotes interoperability amongst them
and you're instantly familiar with the parts of the code
that use collections.
All of these benefits save you a lot of time,
effort, and frustration
while improving the quality of your code.
Learning the architecture and interfaces
of the collections framework
is one of the best ways to level up as a Java developer,
because you're going to see them used everywhere in code.
So next, we'll step down the level
and do some hands-on work with a collection.